From The New York Times,
>> [music]
>> I'm Rachel Abrams and this is The Daily.
>> It's been 3 months since the American
military began firing on boats from
South America, killing more than 80
people [music] and prompting Democrats
to raise urgent questions about whether
these attacks might be illegal. [music]
But now We're going to conduct oversight
and
>> [music]
>> we're going to try to get to the facts
and um New questions about one of those
operations in which the military killed
survivors [music] with a second missile
have prompted congressional Republicans
to join those calls for accountability.
There are very serious concerns in
Congress about the attacks on the
so-called drug boats down [music] in
Today, my colleague Charlie Savage
explains the renewed debate [music] and
how the administration is justifying its
actions.
It's [music] Wednesday, December 3rd.
Charlie, we had you on the show a couple
months ago to talk about the Trump
administration's campaign of boat
strikes in the Caribbean against boats
that they argued were carrying drugs
from Venezuela to the United States and
from the beginning there were questions
about the legality of these attacks,
right? And those questions took on new
urgency this week with lawmakers,
notably Republicans, announcing plans to
investigate. And that's where I'd like
to start today with the Washington Post
story that seems to have kicked all of
this off.
So, the day after Thanksgiving
The Washington Post published a very
good story about the first of Trump's
boat attacks way back on September 2nd.
Now, that had always been the most
questionable of the 21 attacks that have
happened so far and part of the reason
for that is that there were some
additional complicating details that had
come to light in September including
that the boat had turned around before
it attacked
that there were more missile strikes on
the boat before it sank than just the
one that was shown in a video that Trump
had put out.
And The Intercept had reported that
there were initial survivors of the
first missile strike that died in the
subsequent strike.
But that was all kind of bare bones.
[music]
This new story added significant and
rich detail about this strike. And among
the other things it reported was that
Admiral Frank Bradley, who was running
the operation, had ordered the second
strike to kill the survivors of the
first one
because Secretary of Defense Pete
Hegseth said to kill
everyone.
And this set off a furor that had not
happened back in September when the
basic outlines of these facts had first
come to light.
So, explain that for a second, Charlie.
Why is it that
this is now producing this kind of
bipartisan outrage? So, to understand
that, I think you have to work through
the administration's explanation of what
it's doing. Mhm. The administration has
put forward a legal theory that this is
an armed conflict. This is a war that
Trump has decided we're at war even
though Congress has not authorized one,
a war with drug cartels. And that the
people on the boats smuggling these
drugs, supposedly for the drug cartels,
are not criminals, they are combatants.
And a lot of people do not think that is
a legitimate interpretation of the law
and think this is not an armed conflict.
But even if you accept it under the laws
of armed conflict very explicitly
you cannot fire upon people who are out
of the fight. Mhm. People who have
surrendered, people who are incredibly
wounded and unable to fight you back or
explicitly shipwrecked sailors cannot be
fired upon. That is a war crime. So,
based on what you just outlined, this
first strike in September that destroys
the boat, kills most of the people, but
leaves a couple of survivors
that second strike that kills the
remaining survivors because of the rules
of war about not striking people that
basically pose no imminent threat to you
seems illegal on its face. And that is
why this Washington Post story catches
everybody's attention.
What exactly do we know though about
what Hegseth did or did not do in
relation to that September 2nd strike?
Like, what do we know about the order he
gave? So, Hegseth has acknowledged from
the beginning that he authorized a
lethal strike on this boat. This was not
a capture operation. They weren't aiming
to disable the engines and then go
arrest the guys. The aim was to kill the
people on the boat sink the boat,
destroy the purported drugs on the boat.
So, that's not in dispute. But the
question is whether the orders he gave
contemplated that the first missile
wouldn't accomplish all those things and
that there might be shipwrecked
survivors. And if that happened, should
they be killed too?
Or was the order silent on that
possibility?
But whatever was in those orders
we have been told that Hegseth gave no
additional instructions to Bradley once
the attack commenced. Mhm. In other
words, he didn't see or hear that there
were initial survivors and then say
something. But this is something
Congress needs to figure out.
>> Mhm. And regardless of what Hegseth
said
or
intended, the next question is what did
Admiral Bradley understand his orders to
be? Is his intent
we want to kill those two people?
Does he say anything that
leaves a contemporaneous record that
would explain whether he thought he was
specifically trying to kill
shipwrecked survivors or was just
hitting a what he thought was a lawful
target again?
Then this starts to get kind of esoteric
because what difference does it make
if his intent was to specifically kill
these people versus
destroy the vessel if the same missile
is hitting the same object causing the
same damage regardless?
And this is part of the reason why
trying to apply the laws of armed
conflict to this
situation starts to become
very unsatisfactory because these rules
are written for naval engagements
between warships of nation states that
have guns
that are flying colors
and if
a ship wants to surrender
it can lower its colors and stop firing
its guns and then it's out of the fight.
But this is not a warship. This is a
speedboat
that may or may not be carrying an
illicit consumer product.
>> So, basically what you're saying is that
if the intent here from Bradley was to
simply kill the two remaining survivors,
it would be really pretty clear-cut what
he had done and whether it was legal
in terms of the laws of war. But if he
was aiming to sink the boat or destroy
the drugs, which was also part of the
initial mandate and order from Hegseth,
that's where it gets a bit murkier,
right?
That's where it gets murkier.
Of course, even for that initial order
to be lawful, this has to be an armed
conflict which very, very few people
outside of the administration think it
is.
And so if it's not an armed conflict the
first missile was murder, the second
missile was murder, they were all
>> Right. unlawful. How has the
administration responded so far?
The administration as a whole has
defended
the
entire operation.
It has stressed that Hegseth
did not specifically order the killing
of the two initial survivors
and has suggested that that is a
misinterpretation
of what happened.
Nevertheless, it has defended the
actions of Admiral Bradley in ordering
the follow-up strike insisting it was
lawful. And that's the administration as
a whole.
That said
very interestingly on Sunday night
President Trump was asked about this by
reporters and he distanced himself from
the second strike. But no, I wouldn't
have wanted that, not in the second
strike.
The first strike was very legal, it was
fine. And if there were two people
around, but Pete said that didn't
happen. Does that make you
>> I have great confidence.
He said the first one was fine including
the fact that it was lethal but he
wouldn't have wanted the second one.
Well, why not? And And it's it the
suggestion is he has some kind of
discomfort with
that follow-up strike. This all makes me
wonder how this sort of thing would
normally work. Like, the legality of
these strikes in this kind of detail is
the thing at issue. And so I'm curious
about who is advising the people
involved like Commander Bradley or Pete
Hegseth about what is legal and what is
not in the moment. Well
the way it's supposed to work
is the military commanders at each level
of the chain are supposed to have
staff judge advocate general officers
JAGs who are advising them about the
laws of war and what would cross the
line. And
Pete Hegseth has a general counsel.
And he's part of an administration that
is advised by the Justice Department.
But one of the things we know about this
operation as it was getting put together
in July, August, early September leading
up to this initial attack
is that the deliberations were very
closely held
>> Mhm.
and that few career
military lawyers were allowed into the
room.
>> [music]
>> There weren't a lot of lawyers, uniform
lawyers, non-politically appointed
lawyers being allowed into the
deliberations.
Pete Hegseth comes up as a platoon
leader in
war, not a senior commander, and he
seems to have acquired a hostility
towards the idea of military lawyers. He
talks about them as JAG offs in his
memoir. He seems to blame them for
rules of engagement that he found to be
unduly restrictive about when
his troops could open fire on someone
they saw as a threat.
And he seems to misunderstand that the
JAGs are not the ones setting those
rules, the commanders are. And he
acquires from that this hostility. And
the first thing he does
is he fires the top JAGs of the
services. You you know, he's been trying
to replace them with
not career [music]
active duty JAGs that have come up
through the JAG Corps, but with National
Guardsmen who are sort of more political
officials coming out of states.
So, Charlie, what would the legal
rationale be for Bradley to order that
second strike? Like, what would that be
based on? It's hard to answer not
knowing
the details of the sort of questions
that we've been talking about that
remain fuzzy.
And one of the issues here that
listeners ought to understand is that we
now know that behind the scenes, a
couple days after this strike, the
Justice Department's Office of Legal
Counsel, which is a very powerful
node in the executive branch
legal system
produced or signed a memo
that said
it accepted Trump's determination that
this is an armed conflict against the
drug cartels, and that all this stuff
was lawful. And part of the public
justification of all this has been
how is it that the cartels are attacking
us? They're not attacking us, they're
selling an illicit consumer product.
That's bad, but it's not an armed attack
on us. And the the rhetorical
justification has been, yes, but tens of
thousands of Americans are dying from
overdoses each year. And that's
equivalent to an attack. Mhm.
So,
once it's an armed conflict, you can hit
the boat, supposedly.
One of the things that this memo says,
that is different than
the public rhetoric the administration
has been putting forward, is that the
drugs, the purported cargo on these
boats is
a lawful military target.
Why? Because the drug cartels could sell
those drugs, they could get the profits,
and spend them on military equipment to
sustain their supposed war
efforts against the United States. Mhm.
And so, part of this
murkiness around
what is the reason the US fires on this
boat in the first instance, keeps firing
on it until everyone is dead, then the
boat is at the bottom of the ocean, is
was the target
of those follow-up strikes especially?
Was it the drugs? Mhm. Was it the boat?
Or was it the people? Was it all of them
in some confusing way?
Because if Commander Bradley did that
second strike in order to target the
drugs on the boat, and the killing of
the two survivors was collateral damage,
then theoretically, that could be a
defense under what the DOJ laid out as
kosher, right?
Yes, Admiral Bradley is in a much
stronger position if that's what he
says, and if there's contemporaneous
evidence backing him up. Again, though,
only if you accept in the first place
that this is an armed conflict and this
is the right lens to be bringing to bear
on this at all. Because if it's not,
they didn't have a right to kill the
people in the first place.
It sounds like there are compelling
reasons why the killing of the survivors
of that initial strike could be a war
crime, if the intent was to kill them,
which we do not know.
And in fact, there is so much that we
don't know that we cannot say it sounds
like anything definitively.
And because of that, I'm reminded of the
video that those six Democratic
lawmakers released a couple weeks ago,
which urged service members to ignore
illegal orders.
Given everything that we've discussed,
how are service members supposed to
understand what is legal and what is
not?
It is an exceedingly difficult dilemma
when you're faced with a commander in
chief who's issuing orders backed by a
Justice Department memo that very few
people outside of the current executive
branch of government
think holds water. What are soldiers
supposed to do? Right. And just to be
clear, when the lawmakers made that
video, were they aware of any of this?
Were they talking about this?
So, one of the interesting things about
that video from those lawmakers, who are
all military intelligence veterans,
telling soldiers you should not obey
illegal orders, is they don't say what
illegal orders they have in mind.
So, one of the complaints actually by
the Trump administration of, well, what
are you talking about? Are you saying
we've given illegal orders? Which ones?
And, you know, it could be
something about the fact that Trump has
been deploying troops into cities, and
like some of them are acting kind of
like police officers. It could be this
boat's operation. But the Trump
administration responds very fiercely to
that video, and calls them
insurrectionists, and opens
investigations of them for daring to say
this thing, which is actually just a
legal truism.
And that, I think, is a contributing
factor to why, as the country's
attention is returned to legal
controversies surrounding
Trump's killing of people on these
boats,
the reaction has been more
fierce now than in September, when it
was still kind of a new thing that
people were trying to wrap their heads
around.
>> Mhm.
>> [music]
>> This legal cloud has been apparent since
early September.
And Congress, controlled by the
Republican Party, has [music] not been
particularly interested in performing
much oversight
until now.
And so, as this effort unfolds in coming
days and weeks,
it will be interesting to see
how broad the focus is,
what questions lawmakers ask, and what
information they're able to extract.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Charlie, before the break, you told us
about these congressional calls for
investigation.
What might that look like if it
happened? And what power does Congress
actually have here? So,
now that some Republicans on the Armed
Services Committees appear to be
interested in getting some answers, at
least about this second missile strike
in this first attack,
Congress is therefore awakening. We do
not know at this stage how far this
oversight effort will go. It could be
very searching. It could be very
limited.
And all of that is going to depend on
the appetite of Republicans to make life
uncomfortable for the Trump
administration, which, as any observer
of politics knows, is not something that
is easy for them to do.
If they really want to get to the bottom
of this, they have a number of things
they can ask for
and demand
and push the limits to try to get. Such
as? They can call witnesses
and have them give sworn testimony.
Hegseth, obviously. Admiral Bradley,
obviously.
There are things they could ask for, as
well. The The administration has
released, as we know, this sort of
30-second edited surveillance clip that
doesn't show the follow-up strikes. It
doesn't show people surviving the first
attack. But they've You know they've got
that video. In fact, the New York Times
has filed a lawsuit for the unedited
video of that strike.
Congress also could demand that video.
A retired, very senior JAG told me that
one of the questions that could maybe be
parsed through actual evidence
is
what kind of missile
was it that was fired at the boat the
second time?
Because
they can be configured to be anti-
personnel
or anti-material. Anti-personnel missile
can produce a lot of shrapnel to try to
kill people, as opposed to one that's
trying to produce a big hole in a large
object. So, which kind did they shoot?
And did they have the other kind
available? These are all the kinds of
sort of evidentiary questions that if
you're really drilling down into the
nuances of these nitty-gritty things of
what was said and done at each moment,
what was the intent, what was the
understanding,
>> [snorts]
>> Congress could demand
and then see if the Trump administration
is willing
to turn over.
I I want to understand what these
investigations could even amount to. So,
hypothetically, if Congress determines
that the military broke the law, what
then?
So, obviously Congress itself
is a political body and it performs
oversight and it
appropriates funds and it
passes laws. It doesn't prosecute
people. So, it's not its job to bring
charges against anyone. It could cut off
funds to the military for further boat
strikes if it had the political will,
meaning majority votes, to do that in
future appropriations bills. It could
refuse to confirm
Trump appointees until the
administration stops doing this thing it
hypothetically thinks it ought to stop
doing.
>> [gasps]
>> You know, ultimately, in theory, it
could impeach Trump and remove him from
office. But, we all know as a matter of
political reality that that's unlikely
to happen even if Democrats retake
control of one or both chambers.
They won't have the two-thirds necessary
to convict in the Senate. What about
that DOJ memo that we were talking about
though? Like if the military broke the
law, but they didn't go outside of the
bounds of the what that memo authorized,
is anybody vulnerable to any
consequences?
So, the what you're asking about now is
if someone broke the law here, whether
it's the entire operation or just this
follow-up missile strike,
is there a place where theoretically
someone could be charged, let's say with
murder or war crime down the road?
>> Mhm. And the answer to that is
it's very difficult to see where that
could happen.
The fact is that right now, while these
actions are happening, the Justice
Department's official position is
this is lawful. And then you can't
prosecute someone just for doing
anything that you yourself, that is the
Justice Department, said was lawful at
the time. They're relying on your
assurances. You can't bait and switch
people. This is a matter of due process.
And so, this OLC memo, the Justice
Department memo,
a former head of OLC who teaches at
Harvard now named Jack Goldsmith has
famously called them get out of jail
free cards, golden shields. You can just
write down some nonsense on a piece of
paper on OLC letterhead and suddenly
people are free to do whatever that
memo says. And there's just not really a
check on that. It's a It's a just a the
way the structure the system is
structured. I just want to pause here
because what you're saying is
kind of remarkable. I mean, you cannot
write a contract, for instance, and have
two parties sign it that breaks the law
and say, "Well, we have a contract."
What you are saying is that if the DOJ
writes a memo and says that something is
lawful, that protects anybody carrying
out orders within the bounds of that
memo even if, by any other analysis,
those actions are determined to be
illegal. Just the fact that that memo
exists, it sounds like protects people
from prosecution. Domestic federal
prosecution. That's right. This is This
is the power of the Office of Legal
Counsel within the Justice Department.
And we saw an earlier round of this 20
years ago
when, after 9/11, the Bush
administration had in its Office of
Legal Counsel
a lawyer named John Yoo who had a
idiosyncratically broad view of
executive power
that most people thought was wrong.
And under his view, the president could
authorize anything he thought was
necessary to protect national security,
things like wiretapping without
warrants, torturing prisoners. These
memos are later rescinded,
but they were there while this stuff was
happening. And when Eric Holder, the
liberal attorney general under Barack
Obama, comes in in 2009 and opens a
criminal investigation into the
treatment of detainees by the CIA under
the Bush administration,
because of this
problem of the OLC's assurances at the
time,
he says,
"We are only going to look at actions
that went beyond the guidance that was
blessed by the OLC." So, the OLC said
you can waterboard people and you
waterboarded people, even if everyone
else says drowning people is
torture and it's illegal, the OLC said
it was okay, we're not going to
prosecute you for that.
>> Mhm.
Now,
the catch, of course, and this is where
we circle back to this conversation
about the second strike, is the memo
says, apparently,
because this is supposedly an armed
conflict, strikes that comport with the
law of war, the law of armed conflict,
are
permissible. Right. The second missile
strike
in the first attack,
which kills the shipwrecked
survivors of the first missile strike,
arguably does not comport with the law
of armed conflict. And so, that's one
place where
this particular strike, as opposed to
all the others,
might be more vulnerable
to later legal scrutiny
because, especially if there's evidence
that Admiral Bradley's specific intent
was to target the still living crew
members as opposed to the boat
or the supposed cargo.
>> [snorts]
>> That's a point where, despite the OLC
memo,
you could see a later prosecutor, I
guess this would be in the court-martial
system,
were there the political will to do so,
taking a hard look at that.
Right. Basically, if the intent was to
kill the survivors of that first strike,
it arguably would be outside the bounds
of that memo and outside the bounds of
what is considered legal warfare. So,
therefore, the people who launched that
strike potentially could be prosecuted.
Potentially, down the road, if there's
no sweeping preemptive pardon.
Now, of course,
there's also international law.
There is a court in The Hague
in the Netherlands called the
International Criminal Court.
>> Mhm. And it exists as a standing court
to prosecute
war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide. And I should note that we are
not a party to the International
Criminal Court. We are not a party.
The countries of Venezuela and Colombia,
among others, are parties.
And so, there are circumstances in
which, in theory,
American officials could be prosecuted
in The Hague
for actions, let's say, inside
Venezuela, against Venezuelans. In the
same way, right now, the court in The
Hague has an arrest warrant for Vladimir
Putin,
even though Russia is not a member of
the of the treaty that creates the
court,
for his actions in Ukraine, because
Ukraine is a member. Mhm. But, these
boats attacks are, for now at least, all
in international waters. And these boats
are not flying, as far as we know or
have seen on the videos, any country's
flag. They're not registered to
Venezuela or Colombia. They're just
little boats. They're not ships.
And so, without being registered to a
country, without being in the country's
territory,
there's no jurisdiction
for [snorts] the International Criminal
Court over these attacks.
So, nothing, for now, unless this
operation spreads to Venezuela, as it
might, but for now, nothing on these
attacks, including the September 2
attack, would come before the
International Criminal Court.
Charlie, our conversation today was
prompted by, as we discussed, more
scrutiny about the second strike on that
first boat and whether that violates the
rules of armed conflict. But, our
conversation was not prompted by the
question of whether the entire operation
to fire on these boats is illegal,
right? And I am curious, as somebody who
has been following every turn of this
story and is a national security expert,
what do you think about this focus
very specifically on the second strike?
So, on the one hand, it is
good that people are paying attention.
We're seeing congressional oversight
committees swinging into action,
asking hard questions. We'll see how
committed they remain to,
you know, getting the answers, but it
looks kind of like the way congressional
oversight is supposed to function.
And [snorts] people are interested in
something that is objectively very
important.
On the other hand, the questions of who
said what, when, with what intent and
with what interpretation about the
second strike
are very narrow once you start really
drilling down on it.
In a way that is arguably distracting
from the broader issue that has been
apparent
from the beginning
and is not limited to the second missile
strike, but to all the missile strikes.
Mhm. United States is engaged in an
extraordinary,
legally edgy, to say the least,
operation
with literally deadly consequences.
And the broader issue
of is this an armed conflict, is this a
war at all,
hangs over the entire thing.
>> [music]
>> And if it's not a war, if it's not an
armed conflict, even if Trump
says he's determined that it is one,
then it's not just those two deaths
from that second missile on September
2nd
that are at issue.
There have been 21 boat strikes. [music]
83 people have been killed.
And [music] if it's not an armed
conflict, then all 83 of those killings
were arguably
>> [music]
>> just murder.
Charlie Savage, thank you so much.
[music] Thank you.
>> [music]
>> On Tuesday, Defense Secretary Pete
Hegseth said that he had watched the
September 2nd operation live on video,
>> [music]
>> but said that he, quote, "didn't stick
around to see the second strike." So,
you didn't see any survivors, to be
clear, after the first strike.
You personally
>> I did not personally see survivors, but
I stand cuz the thing was on fire. It
was exploded and fire and smoke. You
can't see anything. You got digital
There's This is called the fog of war.
This is what you and the press
don't understand. You sit in your
air-conditioned
>> Hegseth also stood by Admiral Frank
Bradley's decision [music] to order the
second strike.
>> And by the way, Admiral Bradley made the
correct decision to ultimately sink the
boat and eliminate the threat. He sunk
the boat
sunk [music] the boat
and eliminated the
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
I don't want them in our country. I'll
be honest with you, okay? Some would
say, "Oh, that's not politically
correct." I don't care. I don't want
[music]
>> President Trump unleashed a xenophobic
tirade against Somali immigrants on
Tuesday. And we're going to go the wrong
way if we keep taking in garbage into
our country.
Elon was an outburst that captured the
raw nativism that has animated his
approach to immigration.
>> [music]
>> And they complain
and do nothing but
>> [music]
>> We don't want them in our country. Let
them go back to where they came from and
fix
The administration has focused on a
recent investigation into fraud within
the Somali [music] community in
Minnesota,
where federal prosecutors charged dozens
of people with felonies, including
accusations [music]
that people stole hundreds of millions
of dollars from a government program
meant to keep children fed [music]
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
And [music]
Matt Van Epps, a Republican former state
official and Army veteran,
>> [music]
>> won a special election for the House on
Tuesday in Tennessee,
holding off a surprisingly stiff
Democratic challenge in an
overwhelmingly Republican district that
drew a flood of national [music]
attention and money.
The result is a boon in the short term
for President Trump and the Republican
Party,
which had worried that its narrow House
majority would grow even [music]
slimmer.
But the relatively tight margin in a
deep red district still represents a
warning shot [music] about the party's
vulnerabilities ahead of next year's
midterms.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Rob Zipko and Jessica Chung.
It was edited by Lisa Tobin and Paige
Cowett. [music]
Today's music by Alicia at YouTube and
Diane Wong.
It was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily. [music]
I'm Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.